Audit analytic to checks all bundles of a catalog (#66)
operator-framework/enhancements: enhancements/audit-command.md

---
title: audit-command-operation
authors:
  - "@camilamacedo86"
reviewers:
  - TBD
approvers:
  - TBD
creation-date: 2021-02-22
last-updated: 2021-02-22
status: implementable
see-also:
  - [catalog builds in operator-sdk](operator-sdk-builds-catalogs.md)
  - [custom operator validation #43](https://github.com/operator-framework/enhancements/pull/43)
  - [Enhancement for validating bundles in a catsrc image #48](https://github.com/operator-framework/enhancements/pull/48)
  - [operator-framework/api: add new checks to the operatorhub validator][ep-new-checks for-operator-hub]
---

# Audit command operation

## Release Signoff Checklist

- [x] Enhancement is `implementable`
- [x] Design details are appropriately documented from clear requirements
- [x] Test plan is defined
- [ ] Graduation criteria for dev preview, tech preview, GA

## Open Questions 

> 1. Should this command to be added to SDK or OPM or in a new tool?

Author: IHMO we should at least initially add it on SDK. It does not mean that it cannot be indeed maintained by other teams. However, the reasons for that is because it would reduce a lot of the complexities and the effort required to get it done as its complexities. See:  https://github.com/operator-framework/enhancements/pull/66/files#r586452207 and https://github.com/operator-framework/enhancements/pull/66/files#r586458930

> 1. Should this command to be added to SDK or OPM or in a new tool?

Reviewer: @camilamacedo86 `audit` command does not make sense, at least to me, in the SDK. It seems very specific to a production catalog which SDK should not be dealing with. I agree with @estroz comment above.

> 1. Should this command to be added to SDK or OPM or in a new tool?

Author: It was clarified in the open question. 

Also, it is important to highlight that the audit command also requires to perform check against specific Openshift criteria optionally which means that if it not be shipped in SDK or not use SDK binary as you @estroz highlight then the @joelanford suggestion to create in the interface where the specific Opeshift validator can only be used by SDK to address https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/661 might not be so long the best approach. 

Then, we might need to have the OCP validator in the operator-framework api or its downstream component in order to use it and not have any relation with SDK at all if it is the case.

> 1. Should this command to be added to SDK or OPM or in a new tool?

Author: Marking as solved because it is addressed already. However, please feel free to contact me if it still not clear at all.

- Be able to run specific custom checks for each bundle in order to audit the catalog

### Non-Goals

- Add new checks or validators. This proposal has the goal to define the command and operation only. The checks should be addressed in their respective proposals.
- Allow users select what specific validators will be used by the SDK commands. However, it can be addressed in the future.  
 
## Proposal

Add a new command `--audit` with the purpose to audit all desired operator bundle data of a specific index catalog. 

By default, the command output a report where it is possible to have a view of the main characteristics and aspect of all operator bundles shipped in a specified OLM index catalog as check if they are passing in criteria and checks required to ensure their quality. However, accordingly with the purpose of its usage is also possible customize what should or not be done by this operation. 

This command will perform checks by using the [SDK](https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-sdk) available sub commands; `bundle validate` and `scorecard bundle`.

In this way, opm binary will provide the alpha audit sub-command which would like: 

```

> $ alpha --audit --help

Author: yep. It can be.  I did not want to add opm on that because we are not sure if it will or not be part of opm. See the open questions. 

I will add your suggestion as an example OK.

  -w, --wait-time duration       minutes to wait for the report to be complete. Example: 30m (default 20m)                    
  -o, --output                   output format for results. Valid values: xlsx, json (default "xlsx")
  -s, --scorecard bool           set false to disable the scorecard checks. (default true). Note that scorecard test requires a cluster running. 
  -v, --validation bool          set false to disable the bundle validation checks. (default true). 
  -d, --data                     set false to disable the data report. It is useful for who would like to audit the index via only run the bundle and scorecard checks. (default true).
  -h, --head-only                set the flag to audit only the operator bundles which are the head of the channel. (default all bundles of the index catalog image will be used)
  -w, --warning                  set false to disable the report of warning(s) found in the checks (default warning and errors will be reported)
```

Note that the command will:
- Use the index image to gathering the data
- Download the operator bundles

> - Use SDK commands to run the checks 

Author: The first open question raise where we should add the audit. So, we are not saying here that it should be in OPM. PS.: After many thoughts, I do not sure that we should add it to opm at all either

- SDK provides the features required for we check the operator bundles against the criteria. 
- The criteria checks are actually implemented in operator-framework/api and available for any project/tool
- We do not need to re-implement all SDK features to achieve the audit goal and we can only use it and indeed ensure that we are doing the same tests which are provided by the users as well. 

Is it make sense?

> - Use SDK commands to run the checks 

Reviewer: @jmccormick2001 I agree I don't like coupling the two commands. IF we plan to share logic, then I think we should pull some code out and make it into a library to share.

> - Use SDK commands to run the checks 

Author: @jmrodri , the Validators rules used by SDK are already in the operator-frameowork/api as the scorecard config. However, IMO we do not need to re-implemented anything that already exists in the tools. 

See that the audit command ONLY uses SDK binary as any person/job/tool can do so. However, do you see any reason for we re-implement SDK features in another tool/place and have the effort to keep more than once place maintained and etc instead of just call the bin for the audit command in the alpha stage?

> - Use SDK commands to run the checks 

Author: Really thank you for all your inputs. I am closing this one because I think could address in the EP. However, please feel free to ping me if you see that it requires change.

- Output the results
 
### User Stories 
 
- As an admin and or maintainer of OLM index catalog, I would like to check if all bundle operators in the catalogue are respecting all expected criteria so that, I can ensure a better quality of all bundles in the catalogue.
- As an admin and or maintainer of OLM index catalog, I would like to easily know more about the bundles in the catalogue so that, I can easily provide strategies which will be useful for the biggest part of the authors of the projects published on it.
- As an admin and or maintainer of OLM index catalog, identify problems and concerns in the operators bundles of some catalogue so that, I can easily decide if they should or not be removed from the index catalog.

> - As an admin and or maintainer of OLM index catalog I would like to audit the OLM index catalog by running custom tests for each operator bundle that, I can use it to verify if all operator bundles will work as expected.

Author: > This is going to be really hard to implement right now. 

I do not agree. We have a POC for that already which shows that the ideas add here achievable. 

> There is currently no official guidance on packaging test configuration into production bundles afaik, and the unofficial guidance is "don't" (despite what operator-sdk is doing with make bundle)

After 4.5 we have only bundles are on the catalog because it is converted.
Also, it can be easily solved by if is not bundle format then skip sdk bundle validation and scorecard. 

>  How, then, is scorecard supposed to run custom tests if none are packaged? I'd think some official docs on how to bundle tests is a hard prerequisite here.

The audit command will execute the tests ONLY if they are present in the bundle whcih is the automatic behaviour of the SDK scorecard bundle so I do not see any reason for we have a concern here. This EP does not make the custom tests a  hard prerequisite. It only shows how this specific need also is covered here.

> - As an admin and or maintainer of OLM index catalog I would like to audit the OLM index catalog by running custom tests for each operator bundle that, I can use it to verify if all operator bundles will work as expected.

Reviewer 2: >I would see extracting the bundles from the index, but then using an external to the bundle scorecard config to run the audit tests upon the extracted bundle.

@jmccormick2001 that's possible, but would only work for built-in tests, unless a custom test is used that works for any operator.

>This EP does not make the custom tests a hard prerequisite as you described at all

@camilamacedo86 the "hard prerequisite" part here is guidance on packaging any test configuration into a bundle, not the custom test part.

>The audit command will execute the custom tests ONLY if they are present in the bundle which is the automatic behaviour of the SDK scorecard bundle already and we do not need to change anything about it.

But this is the exact problem: as an operator developer, I don't want to have test configs in my production image. @jmccormick2001's solution solves this problem I think.

> - As an admin and or maintainer of OLM index catalog I would like to audit the OLM index catalog by running custom tests for each operator bundle that, I can use it to verify if all operator bundles will work as expected.

Author: Hi @jmccormick2001 @estroz, 

I think I could clarify that better in the meeting today: 
- audit command run scorecard test using what is configured in the bundle
- audit command only add the default tests for the scorecard if the bundle has nothing configured. 

Hi @estroz, 

> I would see extracting the bundles from the index, but then using an external to the bundle scorecard config to run the audit tests upon the extracted bundle.

The custom tests are implemented by the operator author and added on the operator bundle only/if they wish it. audit command is only able to run and get this result to add them in a spreadsheet.   

>  "hard prerequisite" part here is guidance on packaging any test configuration into a bundle, not the custom test part.

if someone today adds custom tests by following the sdk docs and run make bundle these tests go to the bundle. The audit command will able to run that and report the result. We are not saying to the people that it is mandatory. We are just using the data provided by them to gathering the info/results and be able to audit the project.

> - As an admin and or maintainer of OLM index catalog I would like to audit the OLM index catalog by running custom tests for each operator bundle that, I can use it to verify if all operator bundles will work as expected.

Author: The following flags were addressed to address your concerns. All doubts and questions raised by you here were also clarified. I hope that it address all points. Thank you for your feedback and please feel free to ping me or re-open it if you need it. 

```
--scorecard-config         path of the scorecard test directory which will be used as the default scorecard config which be added to the operator bundles. If none be informed the default audit configuration will be used instead
  --scorecard-custom-tests    set false to disable the scorecard checks use the tests which are configured in the bundle. If this option be choosen audit tool will always set its default tests. (default true)
```

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints 

Following the actions which are being proposed in this document for the new command:

- Extract the database from the image informed
- Via sql get all bundles name and paths from the index catalog image
- Download and extract all bundles files by using the operator bundle path

> - Get the required data for the report via sql from the index, from the operator bundle manifest files and from the project repository

Author: It is described in the proposal. The operator bundle repositories as done indeed in the POC linked here. I will clarify it in this line as well.

> - Get the required data for the report via sql from the index, from the operator bundle manifest files and from the project repository

Author: Really thank you. clarified 👍

- Use sdk tool to execute the bundle validate checks
- Use sdk tool to execute the scorecard bundle checks
- Output a report providing the information obtained and processed. 

#### Using the index image to gathering the data

Following an example to extract the sql database from the image: 

> `oc image extract registry.redhat.io/redhat/redhat-operator-index:v4.6 --file=/database/index.db`

Reviewer 2: Use the generic equivalent of this command, since `oc` is for OCP.
````suggestion
```sh
docker create --name rh-catalog registry.redhat.io/redhat/redhat-operator-index:v4.6 "yes"
docker cp rh-catalog:/database/index.db .
```
````

Plus I think `opm` already has some functions to handle this.

Author: It is a point to check for sure. Good point I will add in the open questions.

        └── content_manifests
            └── myopertor-bundle-container-2.8.2-5.json
```

#### Using SDK bundle validate

[SDK](https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-sdk) allows us to validate all bundles: 

```
 $ operator-sdk bundle validate ./bundle --select-optional suite=operatorframework --output=json-alpha1

INFO[0000] Found annotations file                        bundle-dir=bundle container-tool=docker
INFO[0000] Could not find optional dependencies file     bundle-dir=bundle container-tool=docker
{
    "passed": false,
    "outputs": [
        {
            "type": "error",
            "message": "Error: Value : (memcached-operator.v0.0.1) csv.Spec.Icon elements should contain both data and mediatype"
        }
    ]
}
```

Currently, the validators used by it will only ensure the bundle [spec definition](https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-registry/blob/master/docs/design/operator-bundle.md) and the standard requirements to publish an operator in the OperatorHub.io. For further information also check the proposal [operator-framework/api: add new checks to the operatorhub validator][ep-new-checks for-operator-hub].

#### Using SDK scorecard bundle

> For the SDK tool be able to run scorecard tests its configuration requires to be wrote in the bundle directory `tests/scorecard/config.yaml`. ([example](https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-sdk/blob/master/testdata/go/v3/memcached-operator/bundle/tests/scorecard/config.yaml)). Operator bundles which are build with SDK will have the scorecard tests configured by default. ([example](https://github.com/operator-framework/community-operators/tree/master/community-operators/namespace-configuration-operator/1.0.1)).

Reviewer 2: While true, there is no official guidance on bundling tests. Plus I don't think scorecard can respect a pullspec, such that scorecard image tags can be substituted and run within a pipeline.

Author: Sorry, but I think you might misunderstand the proposal at this point. So, I will try to clarify :

- the command will check - has or not scorecard config files on the bundle
- if not: then scaffold the default tests ( same code that we scaffold by default in any new project built with SDK )
- if yes: do nothing

I will try to clarify that in the proposal as well. Others might have the same doubt.

Author: I clarified it better so I think that as fine close this one. Let me know if you still with concerns and feel free to re-open if you see that is required.

 
Note that the bundles might have some specific tests implemented by them using the option to write custom tests. For further information check the [Writing Custom Scorecard Tests](https://sdk.operatorframework.io/docs/advanced-topics/scorecard/custom-tests/) documentation. In this way, if a bundle does not have the default scorecard test configured audit command will add it. Otherwise, the audit command should ensure that specific configuration will be used instead. 

> **NOTE** It is out of the scope of this proposal, however, SDK could allow this configuration also be performed via the plugin system such as by let us execute the plugin which is responsible for that, e.g  `operator-sdk run --plugins=scorecard.sdk.operatorframework.io/v2`, instead of the audit command requires re-implement it. See that it might be easily achievable after the [plugin systems be improved](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kubebuilder/issues/2016).

Reviewer 2: This is a confusing aside since no `operator-sdk run` command exists, and the description is vague and is not in context here. I'd like to see this removed.
```suggestion
```

Author: The note is to illustrate and bring context for the others that in the future would be possible to have a helper in SDK via a plugin that would scaffold the manifests required for we add the scorecard config in the bundle when it is not found. Also, for who will implement it to know how to handle the code and add comments to make it easier we might replace that in the future for an SDK helper.

Author: Removed and better explained in the risks.

- If the attribute `layout of the`PROJECT` file be `go.kubebuilder.io/vX` (see e.g [here](https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-sdk/blob/v1.4.2/testdata/go/v3/memcached-operator/PROJECT#L2)):

| Column | Description | 
| ------ | ----- | 
| Builder | Check if it has plugins with `sdk.operatorframework.io/` (e.g see [here](https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-sdk/blob/v1.4.2/testdata/go/v3/memcached-operator/PROJECT#L12-L14)) to set as `SDK` otherwise it will be `Kubebuilder`|
| Language | `golang` |
| Project Layout | `go.kubebuilder.io/vX` |

However, note that for the previous versions of projects built with `Kubebuilder` we will not found the layout information in the `PROJECT` file as well. (e.g see [here](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kubebuilder/blob/v2.3.2/testdata/project-v2/PROJECT)) then:

| Column | Description | 
| ------ | ----- | 
| Builder | `Kubebuilder`|
| Language | `golang` |
| Project Layout | If the attribute `version` in the `PROJECT` file be `2` it will be `go.kubebuilder.io/v2` otherwise, it will be `go.kubebuilder.io/v1` |

**Gathering the info from go.mod file**

> Now, if the repository has not a `PROJECT` file then, it means that the project could also be built with an SDK version < 1.0 or any other tool which is not SDK or Kubebuilder. In this way, check if the project has a `go.mod` file with the sdk dependency `github.com/operator-framework/operator-sdk`: 

Reviewer 2: I doubt this is feasible, since there is no standard field within a bundle pointing to a version-controlled repository. This is probably a non-goal.

Author: We do that in the POC: https://github.com/jmccormick2001/indexdump/blob/main/gethttp.go#L69
See here in its result we obtaining the 0.17.0 value for example https://github.com/jmccormick2001/indexdump/blob/main/report.txt.11-11-2020#L13

So, yes, it is possible. Look that we indeed linking the POC in the proposal already to help who will implement it check code examples over how to achieve that.

Reviewer 2: Oh I see what this section is saying. So you want the `audit` command to make external network requests? That's definitely something that should be documented in command docs, and have graceful failure for running in an airgapped env.

Author: Yes. I think it was detailed covered here. Really thank you for point out. So, I am closing this one. However, please let me know if you still think that it is missing any detail info.

```go
go 1.13

require (
	github.com/operator-framework/operator-sdk v0.17.0
```

Following how we would set the values for the above example. 

| Column | Description | 
| ------ | ----- | 
| Builder | `SDK`|
| Language | `golang` |
| SDK Version | `v0.17.0` |
| Golang Version | `1.13` |

**NOTE** If the `go.mod` was found but not the SDK dependency we will set the `Language` as `golang`. Also, we will always check the `go.mod` file for Golang projects to know the Golang version used.  

**Gathering the info from build/Dockerfile**

> You will only need to check the `build/Dockerfile` when the project is not writen in Go. In this way, when the `go.mod` file cannot to be found then, it might to be an operator project using Helm or Ansible which was built with an SDK version < 1.0. In this case, we will be looking for `quay.io/operator-framework/ansible-operator` or `quay.io/operator-framework/helm-operator` images. Let's check an Ansible Operator. See the [Dockerfile](https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-sdk-samples/blob/v0.17.0/ansible/memcached-operator/build/Dockerfile): 

Reviewer 2: Similarly infeasible as `PROJECT`.

Author: See that the Dockerfile is only a text file that is parsable. Also, as described above we can check a similar implementation working successfully and doing that. See: https://github.com/operator-framework/enhancements/pull/66#discussion_r585680068

So, I am closing this one.

Reviewer 2: Ditto: https://github.com/operator-framework/enhancements/pull/66#discussion_r586672948

```
FROM quay.io/operator-framework/ansible-operator:v0.17.0
```

| Column | Description | 
| ------ | ----- | 
| Builder | `SDK`|
| Language | `ansible` |
| SDK Version | `v0.17.0` |

Now, see a [Dockerfile](https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-sdk-samples/blob/v0.17.0/helm/memcached-operator/build/Dockerfile) for a Helm operator project built with SDK version < 1.0. Then, note that the same fields will be obtained:

| Column | Description | 
| ------ | ----- | 
| Builder | `SDK`|
| Language | `helm` |
| SDK Version | `v0.17.0` |

### Auditing just the latest channel heads 

This option allows the user audit only the latest bundle versions (default channel heads) for each package. It can be enabled by setting `--head-only` boolean flag.

By using this flag, the audit command will filter the operator bundles in the first step to download and extract just this ones. 

To know the operator bundles which are the latest head we will get only the entries which has values in the `operatorbundle` table for both `csv` and `bundle` column. 

### Disabling the data to perform only the checks

> By using the option `--data=false`, the audit command will only be gathering the operator bundle names and run the checks. All other columns described above will be skipped.

Reviewer 2: `--data` is ambiguous. If you're talking about toggling report generation, then use `--report`.
```suggestion
By using the option `--report=false`, the audit command will only be gathering the operator bundle names and run the checks. All other columns described above will be skipped.
```

Author: Theoretically, a report will be always generated. The result is always a report. These flag allow the user to disable the **data** obtained/gathered from the index.db and project repository and then because of this I choose the name data. I am totally open to new ideas and suggestions. However, because of this, I'd not like to use the word --report as well. 

Have you another idea/suggestion?

Author: It was addressed with the @jmrodri suggestion to `--checks-only`. so, I am closing this one.

This option is useful for who would like to add the audit in an automated CI job for example to check the catalog.  
 
### Disabling the warning(s)

> By using the option `--warning=false`, the audit command will only raise the errors  found.

Reviewer 2: It would be better to toggle "exit on warnings" instead, since warning logs are still useful.

Author: Sorry, could you please clarify your idea/suggestion? Would you like to change the name or description of the flag? 
 
The motivation is allowed use `--audit` and the flags for only get as result all errors in JSON format and not the warnings which is a useful option for CI jobs.

Reviewer 2: Let me ask a question instead: why would you want to turn off warnings, since they do not affect the outcome of the question "is a bundle valid"? Wouldn't it be better to have a flag `--err-on-warn` to have the audit fail a particular bundle if any warnings come up?

Author: The `--warning=false` is to address the idea:

I want to use audit to just run bundle validation and gets the errors in a CI job. I do not want to care about the warnings and recommendations at all.

Author: It was changed by `--error-only` which I hope to address your feedback as well. So, I am closing this one. Feel free to make other suggestion if you wish.

This option is useful for who would like to add the audit in an automated CI job for example to check the catalog combined with the flag `--data=false`.  
 
### Risks and Mitigations

> A risk is the command take to long to be executed. In order to mitigate it, the flags `--wait-time` and customize the checks that should be done as the data that could be used was added: 

Reviewer 2: `--wait-time` should be configured on a per-bundle or per-test basis, since the caller would have to calculate `wait time * bundles in catalog * number of tests` to get a reasonable estimate for an overall wait time.

Author: The idea is we have a default timeout set up for the command and then, it can be changed by the flag for who is using it and has a better idea over what would be a reasonable time or not for the case checked. 

I do not think that we should try to guess a default timeout based on the bundles and etc. It can change a lot since the user might be running the full report or not, might be using the checks or not and etc. So, to keep the simplicity IMO the best approach is to define a default time and let people configure it as they wish.

Author: Addressed in the EP as well. So, I am closing, however,  please feel free to re-open if you wish.

Reviewer 2: I disagree that having an overall timeout is useful, unless you set it to 10 hours or something ridiculous.

Author: For the alpha version, I do not think that we need or should to address this kind of complexity. I'd prefer the timeout as 2 hours by default instead. We are allowing users to change it as please them which shows enough.  I will try to clarify in the open questions.

The time to process the full report is proportional to the quantity of operator bundles be in the index catalog image and of projects which are not built with SDK and its latest version(s) since will be required to more requests against the project repositories to gathering the information.

However, see the [POC](
https://github.com/jmccormick2001/indexdump) project which proves that this command operation is achievable.  

## Implementation History

Note that this proposal shows replace the need of others open pull requests such as:
- [Enhancement for validating bundles in a catsrc image #48](https://github.com/operator-framework/enhancements/pull/48). The audit command shows cover all requirements raised in this proposal.
- [Custom operator validation #43](https://github.com/operator-framework/enhancements/pull/43): The audit command will able to use scorecard which let the operator bundle developers create their own specific tests for their bundles. In this way, the requirement to allow extending the Validators from the [operator-framework/api](https://github.com/operator-framework/api) might no longer be need and or to be a priority.

> [ep-new-checks for-operator-hub]: https://github.com/operator-framework/enhancements/pull/65

Reviewer 3: how does this EP replace the need for #65 ?  it seems to build on top of #65

Author: No. It is a link alias on the bottom. The EP replaces the above 2 proposals only.

Reviewer 3: got it.

---
title: audit-command-operation
authors:
  - "@camilamacedo86"
reviewers:
  - TBD
approvers:
  - TBD
creation-date: 2021-02-22
last-updated: 2021-03-02
status: implementable
see-also:
  - [catalog builds in operator-sdk](operator-sdk-builds-catalogs.md)
  - [custom operator validation #43](https://github.com/operator-framework/enhancements/pull/43)
  - [Enhancement for validating bundles in a catsrc image #48](https://github.com/operator-framework/enhancements/pull/48)
  - [operator-framework/api: add new checks to the operatorhub validator][ep-new-checks for-operator-hub]
---

# Audit command operation

## Release Signoff Checklist

- [x] Enhancement is `implementable`
- [x] Design details are appropriately documented from clear requirements
- [x] Test plan is defined
- [ ] Graduation criteria for dev preview, tech preview, GA

## Open Questions 

1. Should this command to be added to SDK or OPM or in a new tool?

**Context**

> The audit command will perform checks that are implemented and are provided via SDK tool commands `bundle validate` and `scorecard` already. Then, it could be done from SDK binary or use it. However, the OPM tool is the tool that has been used with the purpose of admin the catalogs. 

Reviewer: It seems weird for `opm` to call `operator-sdk` binary. And equally weird to have `audit` command added to `operator-sdk` binary. Seems to me that if `opm` needs access to the things that `bundle validate` and `scorecard` need to do we should look at pulling that functionality out into a consumable library that could be used by both tools.

Author: The EP does not define where it would be done. However, it might not be done in SDK or OPM either.  Please check that all these points are better clarified now in the EP as well.

> Note that SDK will also get starts to allow users to work with catalogs by using opm. See the proposal [catalog builds in operator-sdk](operator-sdk-builds-catalogs.md).

Reviewer: While the SDK has some catalog abilities in that EP it was expressed as a [non-goal](https://github.com/operator-framework/enhancements/blob/master/enhancements/operator-sdk-builds-catalogs.md#non-goals)

- Re-implement any part of the catalog management process.
- Add any catalog-related code or files to `operator-sdk` projects, ex. `index.Dockerfile`.
- Add any other functionality other than build a catalog locally (`opm index add`).

Author: Your argumentation was added in the open question as well thank you.

Also, the motivations of the proposal [Custom operator validation](https://github.com/operator-framework/enhancements/pull/43)  confirms the interest of OPM users in the audit command. 

> The downside of create a new tool for this purpose shows mainly be the effort to keep it maintained and not take advantage of is  implemented already as ask for users which who requires to audit the OLM index catalogs and would like to use this feature also install an additional tool since they probably work already with opm or sdk and maybe both indeed. 

Reviewer: I don't think it is necessary to have a new tool, I think `opm` makes more logical sense since it already manages the catalogs.

Author: Maybe. However, it shows more of a product owner decision. See the open question info and note that your point is addressed there as well. This proposal has the goal to discuss what/how to audit command will work and then, where it will be implemented is a secondary question.

**Conclusion**
//TODO: Add the consensus reached out. 

## Summary

> This proposal describes a new operation provided via an alpha command/solution which has the purpose to audit all bundles of some specific OLM index catalog and then, output a report.

Reviewer: based on the summary alone, I do not think this should go in `operator-sdk`. This sounds way more like `opm` to me.

Author: It is better clarified in the open question. This proposal his not defining it should be done in SDK.

> ## Motivation

Reviewer: What's the motivation for this command? That should be listed in this section.

Author: Add a description beyond the goals.

### Goals

- Be able to audit all bundles of an OLM index catalog and output a report
- Be able to easily check and identify aspects of the operators bundles which will be published on it such as:
    - check if they are using deprecated apis

>     - check if they are built with sdk and its versions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - check if they are built with SDK and its versions
```

    - the language used 
    - check if they are multi-arch
    - check if they are using some relevant feature provided by looking their annotations
    - check if they are following the recommendations and conventions defined
    - check all warnings and errors which will be raised by using the SDK features scorecard and bundle validate
- Be able to extract a report with the audit results and in some formats such as json. 
- Be able to run specific custom checks for each bundle in order to audit the catalog

> - Provide a documentation over how to use the audit command

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Provide documentation on how to use the audit command
```

Reviewer: These goals all sound like the items that a Catalog maintainer would want to know NOT an operator developer.

- Allow users select what specific validators will be used by the SDK commands. However, it can be addressed in the future.
- Provide documentation that will describe how to add the custom scorecard tests in the bundle done with [Writing Custom Scorecard Tests](https://sdk.operatorframework.io/docs/advanced-topics/scorecard/custom-tests/) manually for Non-SDK projects or bundles which are not built with `make bundle` and how they are used with the audit command.
 
**IMPORTANT**: Note that we are describing here an analytic tool/command that will start to be implemented in **alpha**. This feature uses what is in place and implemented already and cover needs which are raised in other proposals such as [Custom operator validation #43](https://github.com/operator-framework/enhancements/pull/43). However, it does not make any change or requires any new behaviour for the operator authors. The possibilities covered by the audit command can be easily documented after the first version of it this command be in place. 

## Proposal

> Add a new command `audit` with the purpose to audit all desired operator bundle data of a specific index catalog. 

Reviewer: Add a new command to WHAT? It is not clear if the plan is to add it to `opm` or to `operator-sdk`. I would suggest that you pick one approach in the main portion of this EP. Then document the other approach in an `Alternative` section in the EP. That way both can be documented.

Author: See the open question. I clarified that. It is not the goal of the EP defined that. It is secundary.

> By default, the command output a report where it is possible to have a view of the main characteristics and aspect of all operator bundles shipped in a specified OLM index catalog as check if they are passing in criteria and checks required to ensure their quality. However, accordingly with the purpose of its usage is also possible customize what should or not be done by this operation. 

Reviewer: What is the format of this report? printed in tabulated format to the console? exported as a CSV (the comma space values one) to be imported into a spreadsheet? PDF?

Author: Only file which can be JSON or XLS.

Author: > What is the format of this report? 
For the alpha version only JSON and XLS

> printed in tabulated format to the console?  exported as a CSV (the comma space values one) to be imported into a spreadsheet? PDF?

we have here a reasonable quantity of data to report then, we cannot use the console for that. also, implement a tabulated format for this requirement shows a high effort compared with using the Golang lib suggested here to create the XLS. And then, it also ould not address all requirements since we would like to provide nice reports for human. 

I am closing this one. However, please feel free to re-open if you think that we need to address any additional detail in the EP. Thank you.

This command will perform checks by using the [SDK](https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-sdk) available sub commands; `bundle validate` and `scorecard bundle`.

In this way, the binary will provide the alpha audit sub-command which would like: 

```
$ alpha audit --help

Flags:
  -h, --help                     help for audit

>   -i, --index-image              index image to get package from. 

Reviewer: I think the index image will always be required correct? Seems it should be a required argument and not a flag. 

```
alpha audit <index-image> [flags]
```

Author: We can list the validators that can be used as well. So, I am not sure.

  -c, --container-tools          the container tool used to login in the registry and pull and extract the images. One of: [docker, podman] (default "docker")

>   -w, --wait-time duration       minutes to wait for the report to be complete. Example: 60m (default timeout is 30m)       

Reviewer: minutes? For something that takes this long I'd almost want a progress bar to know things are running. Or at least some message that states 

```console
$ opm alpha audit my-index:latest --wait-time 45m
Audit in progress, please be patient, timeout set to 45m
```

Author: The educated guess is 2 hours for the full report. See that this topic is covered in `#### Informing the command progress`. The idea is output the logs for CI and users know what is happening in this alpha stage. However, yes we could improve that and do things or fancy in the future.

>   -o, --output                   output format for results. Valid values: xlsx, json (default "xlsx")

Reviewer: This answers my report format above. I would still indicate the potential report formats.

  -s, --scorecard bool           set false to disable the scorecard checks. (default true). Note that scorecard test requires a cluster running. 
  -v, --validation bool          set false to disable the bundle validation checks. (default true). 

>   -d, --data                     set false to disable the data report. It is useful for who would like to audit the index via only run the bundle and scorecard checks. (default true).

Reviewer: gut feeling that `data` seems like a weird flag, but I'm not sure exactly what this "data" report means. Maybe `--checks-only` flag to indicate we are only going to run checks against the index.

Author: I loved the checks-only suggestion 👍

  -h, --head-only                set the flag to audit only the operator bundles which are the head of the channel. (default all bundles of the index catalog image will be used)
  -w, --warning                  set false to disable the report of warning(s) found in the checks (default warning and errors will be reported)
```

Note that the command will:
- Use the index image to gathering the data
- Download the operator bundles
- Use SDK commands to run the checks 
- Output the results

> **NOTE** If we move forward with this command as part of opm it would be like: `opm alpha index audit --help`

Reviewer: I think `alpha index audit` is a WAY better command.

Author: done

Author: If it is addressed in opm yes it might make sense. However, if it is a new tool for example then it shows not appropriated any more. IMO which is relevant here is we defined how and what does audit command then, this kind of detail shows not matter too much as to where it will be implemented.

 
### User Stories 
 
- As an admin and or maintainer of OLM index catalog, I would like to check if all bundle operators in the catalogue are respecting all expected criteria so that, I can ensure a better quality of all bundles in the catalogue.
- As an admin and or maintainer of OLM index catalog, I would like to easily know more about the bundles in the catalogue so that, I can easily provide strategies which will be useful for the biggest part of the authors of the projects published on it.
- As an admin and or maintainer of OLM index catalog, identify problems and concerns in the operators bundles of some catalogue so that, I can easily decide if they should or not be removed from the index catalog.

> - As an admin and or maintainer of OLM index catalog I would like to audit the OLM index catalog by running custom tests for each operator bundle that, I can use it to verify if all operator bundles will work as expected.

Reviewer: This really solidifies to me that this should go into `opm` and NOT `operator-sdk` because it is the admin persona that is more relevant.

Author: I think it was answered in other similar comments so marking it as solved.

> - **(Optional)** As operator developer I would like to configure scorecard via SDK in a bundle of a project which is a NO-SDK layout so that, I could check my bundle with scorecard feature. For more info check [Scorecard config manifests](#scorecard-config-manifests). We can address it in the audit command as well at the first moment with some implications. Then, it is not required at all if the solution get shipped on SDK too.

Reviewer: Running scorecard against a non-SDK project seems out of context compared to the rest of this EP.  Maybe I'm missing something.

Author: In the catalog we have the bundles, I just want a way to scaffold the 1 file that setups the scorecard for the bundle when it does not exist. why not audit does that? Because it can change then I will run the sdk scorecard with SDK bin version A and the config is not compatible.

Author: I removed it and clarified. Also, the EP was improved to cover all concerns about this subject. Please, feel free to check and let me know what do you think.

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints 

Following the actions which are being proposed in this document for the new command:

- Extract the database from the image informed
- Via sql get all bundles name and paths from the index catalog image
- Download and extract all bundles files by using the operator bundle path

> - Get the required data for the report via sql from the index, from the operator bundle manifest files and from the operator repository

Reviewer: If we add this to `operator-sdk` does this not mean that `operator-sdk` will now require sqlite and require `cgo`? Or does `opm` no longer use that?

Author: The catalog will be migrated from sql to json format. it could be indeed another module inside of sdk as well. if we decide to move forward with that in sdk has many ways to still keep the implementation isolated and move that for any place in the future.

Author: The index will be migrated to JSON format. So, it would no longer be required.
However, if we decide to add it to SDK and it still in the current format then I understand we would only need the SQL dep as it was added in the POC see: https://github.com/jmccormick2001/indexdump/blob/main/go.mod#L7

We would not require cgo.

- Use sdk tool to execute the bundle validate checks

> - Use sdk tool to execute the scorecard bundle checks

Reviewer: Seems like we should extract the necessary bits so that they can be reused as a library.

Author: We have a lib for that already. the implementation used by the feature is done in framework/api. However, would imo not make sense to re-write the sdk implementation for that instead of just use it via a bin dep ass for example.

Author: Clarified as well in the EP and in many similar comments here. So, I am closing this as sorted out.

Author: We have the validators and the scorecard config implemented in the operator-framework/api. then, we would need basically re-write the scorecard and bundle validate features (sdk code implementation) for the audit as well.

> - Output a report providing the information obtained and processed. 

Reviewer: This almost looks like a shell script that could extract the information then run operator-sdk and tabulate the output.

Author: I really think that would be better we use go instead of shell in order to keep it maintained, allow it to grow and address future requirements. See that we have a poc and the ep adds lib in go that makes very easy we write a xls file as well.

    "outputs": [
        {
            "type": "error",
            "message": "Error: Value : (memcached-operator.v0.0.1) csv.Spec.Icon elements should contain both data and mediatype"
        }
    ]
}
```

Currently, the validators used by it will only ensure the bundle [spec definition](https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-registry/blob/master/docs/design/operator-bundle.md) and the standard requirements to publish an operator in the OperatorHub.io. For further information also check the proposal [operator-framework/api: add new checks to the operatorhub validator][ep-new-checks for-operator-hub].

#### Using SDK scorecard bundle

For the SDK tool be able to run scorecard tests its configuration requires to be wrote in the bundle directory (e.g `tests/scorecard/config.yaml` see [here](https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-sdk/blob/master/testdata/go/v3/memcached-operator/bundle/tests/scorecard/config.yaml)). Operator bundles which are build with SDK will have the scorecard tests configured by default. (e.g see [here](https://github.com/operator-framework/community-operators/tree/master/community-operators/namespace-configuration-operator/1.0.1)).

>  

Reviewer 4: I'd guess that the CI/Pipeline people would make use of a custom scorecard image that implemented these audit tests.  So, I'd probably target this towards those users (e.g. CVP).  For that purpose, I'd construct a custom scorecard image that will execute these tests.  Then, CVP or others could modify their scorecard config's to include these tests if they want.  Users can either add the custom scorecard image configuration into their bundle's config.yaml directly (and therefore in their source code), or CVP or others can run scorecard with the --config flag to run scorecard with an externalized config.yaml which would then include this sort of custom image test configuration.  If this custom image proves useful, then you could determine later on to add this into the SDK generated config.yaml at a later point.

Author: I am only saying here that: 
- audit tool requires to write the config when/only it does not exist
- in oder to avoid it write a config that is not compatible with SDK version X used to run the checks we would need a command that does this job

**IMPORTANT** It is a need that no longer exists by just adding audit in SDK. +1 reason here for in POV we move forward with the solution shipped in SDK.

Author: It is a great idea. Addressed!

### Auditing just the latest channel heads 

This option allows the user audit only the latest bundle versions (default channel heads) for each package. It can be enabled by setting `--head-only` boolean flag.

By using this flag, the audit command will filter the operator bundles in the first step to download and extract just this ones. 

To know the operator bundles which are the latest head we will get only the entries which has values in the `operatorbundle` table for both `csv` and `bundle` column. 

#### Disabling the data to perform only the checks

By using the option `--data=false`, the audit command will only be gathering the operator bundle names and run the checks. All other columns described above will be skipped.

This option is useful for who would like to add the audit in an automated CI job for example to check the catalog.  
 
#### Disabling the warning(s)

By using the option `--warning=false`, the audit command will only raise the errors  found.

This option is useful for who would like to add the audit in an automated CI job for example to check the catalog combined with the flag `--data=false`.  

> #### Allowing re-start the process from the latest point

Author: A CI job can re-start a job from where it stops without the need to be re-started. It is achievable. ( retry x times for example in shell )

I do not think that is a high effort to be implemented and I am trying to avoid the scenario where we start to run the full report an issue occurs and we need to wait for more than 2 hours again instead of starting from the last point. 

However, I totally agree that thinking in **alpha** solution does not need to be a pre-requirement.

> #### Allowing re-start the process from the latest point

Author: Marking as solved since it is addressed in the EP now as well.

To address this requirement user are able to use the flag `--head-only`.

#### As an admin and or maintainer of OLM index catalog, I would like to define what is the tool which will be used to pull and save the images so that, I can define it accordingly with the tool which i have installed and has my credentials when required.

To address this requirement user are able to use the flag `--container-tools` and inform the option as please them.

#### As an admin and or maintainer of OLM index catalog, I'd like to define a timeout so that, I can customize it according to my expectations and avoid a process get stuck or increase the default time when I know that it will require more time to be processed.

To address this requirement user are able to use the flag `--wait-time` and inform a time in minutes which will be used instead of the default timeout.

#### As an admin and or maintainer of OLM index catalog, I'd like to look at all the bundles of a package holistically and attempts to detect potential error conditions so that, I can easily identify errors in the upgrade graph paths.

> //TODO:

Author: @bentito you have been working on in the poc for a tool to create the visual paths. Could you please help me out here? Have you ideas of checks that would be possible? Also, could you please provide all links over the graphs pocs. It might indeed be helpful. really thank you for your time and attention as well.

Reviewer 5: Here's a link to my repo where I'm pushing the work on a graphing tool to output Mermaid script files:
https://github.com/bentito/olm-mermaid-graph
It's basically a reworking of @joelanford 's https://github.com/joelanford/olm-index-graph . I made it work as a pipeline to remove the sqlite library dep. I've tried to keep the README current and the Makefile is the main source of running it conveniently. 

As far as checks based off learning from having worked on that code, I think there are some that are embedded in the validate package portion of the code and perhaps they could be extracted out. I actually made it less stringent on the validation though because it was dying in the validation on the Red Hat 4.6 index! and I most wanted all the package graphs to come out in the end.

---
title: audit-command-operation
authors:
  - "@camilamacedo86"
reviewers:
  - TBD
approvers:
  - TBD
creation-date: 2021-02-22
last-updated: 2021-03-02
status: implementable
see-also:
  - [custom operator validation #43](https://github.com/operator-framework/enhancements/pull/43)
  - [Enhancement for validating bundles in a catsrc image #48](https://github.com/operator-framework/enhancements/pull/48)
  - [operator-framework/api: add new checks to the operatorhub validator][ep-new-checks for-operator-hub]
  - [New OpenShift Validator][ocp-validator-proposal]
---

# Audit command operation

## Release Signoff Checklist

- [x] Enhancement is `implementable`
- [x] Design details are appropriately documented from clear requirements
- [x] Test plan is defined
- [ ] Graduation criteria for dev preview, tech preview, GA

## Open Questions 

1. Should this command be added into SDK or OPM or in a new tool?

> Beside the [catalog builds in operator-sdk](operator-sdk-builds-catalogs.md) proposal, SDK maintainers (@jesus, @estroz) point out that they think that it would better fit in OPM and not in SDK and that while the SDK has some catalog abilities in that EP see that t has been using OPM binary as dependency to achieve it and the [non-goal](https://github.com/operator-framework/enhancements/blob/master/enhancements/operator-sdk-builds-catalogs.md#non-goals).

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Beside the [catalog builds in operator-sdk](operator-sdk-builds-catalogs.md) proposal, SDK maintainers (@jesus, @estroz) point out that they think that it would better fit in OPM and not in SDK and that while the SDK has some catalog abilities in that EP see that it has been using OPM binary as dependency to achieve it and the [non-goal](https://github.com/operator-framework/enhancements/blob/master/enhancements/operator-sdk-builds-catalogs.md#non-goals).
```

> However, this proposal aims to discuss the audit command and how and what it will do and not exactly where it will live. This decision is out of this proposal's scope since it brings strategy decisions that raise questions like: Do we want more than one tool for the framework? We will have a tool kit that helps out users with the framework solutions or many for each purpose? What are the advantages and facilities or not for the users and maintainers in all scenarios? What is the vision for OPM and SDK tools as Operator Framework in the future?. In this way, let's keep it open until we are able to properly defined all that should be done by audit and how as to have the resources required to address and implement this proposal.

Author: ```suggestion
However, this proposal aims to discuss the audit command and how and what it will do and not exactly where it will live. This decision is out of this proposal's scope since it brings strategy decisions that raise questions. In this way, let's keep it open until we are able to properly defined all that should be done by audit and how to have the resources required to address and implement this proposal.
```

To address this requirement user are able to use the flag `--head-only`.

#### As an admin and or maintainer of OLM index catalog, I would like to define what is the tool which will be used to pull and save the images so that, I can define it accordingly with the tool which I have installed and has my credentials when required.

To address this requirement user are able to use the flag `--container-tools` and inform the option as please them.

#### As an admin and or maintainer of OLM index catalog, I'd like to define a timeout so that, I can customize it according to my expectations and avoid a process get stuck or increase the default time when I know that it will require more time to be processed.

To address this requirement user are able to use the flag `--wait-time` and inform a time in minutes which will be used instead of the default timeout.

#### As an admin and or maintainer of OLM index catalog, I'd like to look at all the bundles of a package holistically and attempts to detect potential error conditions so that, I can easily identify errors in the upgrade graph paths.

//TODO:

> 

Author: Thoughts: 
- Is the channel head and has replace for a bundle that does not exist then should return an error
- WIP

- Use sdk tool to execute the scorecard bundle checks
- Perform the catalog-level checks and analyses
- Output a report providing the information obtained and processed. 

#### Using the index image to gathering the data

Following an example to extract the sql database from the image currently: 

```sh
docker create --name rh-catalog registry.redhat.io/redhat/redhat-operator-index:v4.6 "yes"
docker cp rh-catalog:/database/index.db .
```

After that, the `index.db` file can be used by the tool which can gathering the required information via sql. 

To know how to use SQL to read the index.db file check [here](https://github.com/jmccormick2001/indexdump/blob/main/pullrepos.go#L74) a code example.

The above steps are base on the current index catalog format as a database. It might be changed for JSON format which should be used instead. The audit command just requires to support the latest index catalog format which in this case will be JSON. More info [Package representation and management in an index](https://github.com/operator-framework/enhancements/blob/master/enhancements/declarative-index-config.md).

#### Downloading and extracting the operator bundles

> The OLM index image does not store the operator bundle manifests. The operator bundle registry address can be found in the `bundlepath` entry from the`operatorbundle` table. We need to use `docker` or `podman` tools to pull and extract the operator bundle files. Note that the audit command let the user choose what container tool should be used via flag `--container-tool`. 

Author: I need to add here that we need to ignore all deprecated bundles as well.

7. Why provides an API with the upgrade channel graph logic?

We could implement for audit the same rules required to build the upgrade graph in OLM. However, see that it will be tough to ensure that it will always be the same ones used by OLM. If it be changed, and then, audit as any other solution will get outdated.

So, the best approach for we audit the upgrade graphs or use it any other solutions, such as we are trying to create to check if would be possible to have visual tools for that like [via mermade](https://github.com/bentito/olm-mermaid-graph) and this another [example](https://github.com/joelanford/olm-index-graph), would to be use an API provide by OLM which will return the upgrade graph paths of a package and/or the errors faced to build it.

8. How the proposal [New OpenShift Validator][ocp-validator-proposal] affects the audit?

See that in this proposal, we are providing some alternatives to implement the specific check. However, to address specific downstream concerns and checks are out of the scope of this proposal. 

9. Will audit command works with downstream and upstream specific checks?

> To address specific downstream concerns and checks are out of the scope of this proposal. 

Author: The idea so far is the audit tool have its own repo. After we implement that if we decide that it should be moved for any other place than by sure we can revisit it.

- Be able to easily check and identify aspects of the operators bundles which will be published on it such as:
    - check if they are using deprecated apis
    - check if they are built with SDK and its versions
    - the language used 
    - check if they are multi-arch
    - check if they are using some relevant feature provided by looking their annotations
    - check if they are following the recommendations and conventions defined
    - check all warnings and errors which will be raised by using the SDK features scorecard and bundle validate
- Be able to extract a report with the audit results and in some formats such as json. 
- Be able to run specific custom checks for each bundle in order to audit the catalog
- Be able to perform validations and analyses in the bundle and index catalog and bundle level.
- Be able to check all bundles of index catalog against the Validators implemented in [operator-framework/api][operator-framework/api] among against the new checks described in the proposal [operator-framework/api: add new checks to the operatorhub validator][ep-new-checks-for-operator-hub]

### Non-Goals

> - Add new checks or validators in [operator-framework/api][operator-framework/api]. This proposal has the goal to define the command and operation only. The checks should be addressed and discussed in their respective proposals.

Author: I am not sure if I am following that. The only checks describe here which are not implemented yet are related  #65.. See that api already have checks as SDK already provide the Scorecard feature with default checks.  See:

 - (it is part of the audit implementation) Be able to audit all bundles of an OLM index catalog and output a report 
-(it is part of the audit implementation + existent and new checks) Be able to easily check and identify aspects of the operators bundles which will be published on it such as:
    - check if they are using deprecated apis - #65
    - check if they are built with SDK and its versions - (audit implementation) 
    - the language used - (audit implementation) 
    - check if they are multi-arch - (audit implementation) 
    - check if they are using some relevant feature provided by looking at their annotations - (audit implementation) 
    - check if they are following the recommendations and conventions defined #65
    - check all warnings and errors which will be raised by using the SDK features scorecard and bundle validate (it already exist and when the proposal #65 be implemented also will be used )
- Be able to extract a report with the audit results and in some formats such as json.  -  (audit implementation) 
- Be able to run specific custom checks for each bundle in order to audit the catalog - (runs sdk bundle validate and scorecard which already exists)
- Be able to perform validations and analyses in the bundle and index catalog and bundle level. - same
- Be able to check all bundles of index catalog against the Validators implemented in [operator-framework/api][operator-framework/api] among against the new checks described in the proposal [operator-framework/api: add new checks to the operatorhub validator][ep-new-checks-for-operator-hub] -same

> - Add new checks or validators in [operator-framework/api][operator-framework/api]. This proposal has the goal to define the command and operation only. The checks should be addressed and discussed in their respective proposals.

Reviewer 3: > All "checks" already exists, and the data here will be obtained by audit. The only checks which do not exist are

your second sentence contradicts your first.

> check if they are built with SDK and its versions - (audit implementation)
the language used - (audit implementation)
check if they are multi-arch - (audit implementation)
check if they are using some relevant feature provided by looking at their annotations - (audit implementation)

These are all new checks being proposed by this EP, to be implemented in the audit tool.  Though I would suggest you distinguish between a check (something which can pass or fail) and a report(something which is just informational).  Will audit fail if a bundle is not multiarch?  Will if fail if it uses a particular language?  Will it fail if it uses the wrong SDK version?

> check if they are using deprecated apis 

No reason to call this out explicitly.  You've made it clear that most of the validation logic being done by the audit tool comes from delegating to the sdk scorecard+validator.  So unless you are going to list every single check the validator+scorecard are capable of performing, you should simply make it clear that the audit tool will, via delegation, perform the same checks that validation+scorecard perform (including any new checks added to validation in the future, as is suggested by the other EP that is proposing new checks)

> - Add new checks or validators in [operator-framework/api][operator-framework/api]. This proposal has the goal to define the command and operation only. The checks should be addressed and discussed in their respective proposals.

Author: changed that for a more generic statement as suggested.

- Any specific criteria per vendor proposed for example [New OpenShift Validator][ocp-validator-proposal].

## Proposal

Add a new command `audit` with the purpose to audit all desired operator bundle data of a specific index catalog. 

By default, the command output a report where it is possible to have a view of the main characteristics and aspect of all operator bundles shipped in a specified OLM index catalog as check if they are passing in criteria and checks required to ensure their quality. Another group of checks and analyses that ought to be addressed by audit command are validations which looks at all the bundles of a package holistically and attempts to detect potential error conditions. 

In this way, the alpha audit sub-command would like: 

```
$ alpha audit --help

Flags:
  --help                     help for audit
  --index-image              index image to get package from. 
  --container-tools          the container tool used to login in the registry and pull and extract the images. One of: [docker, podman] (default "docker")

>   --wait-time duration       minutes to wait for the report to be complete. Example: 60m (default timeout is 120m)

Author: Changed

  --scorecard-config         path of the scorecard test directory which will be used as the default scorecard config which be added to the operator bundles. If none be informed the default audit configuration will be used instead
  --scorecard-custom-tests    set false to disable the scorecard checks use the tests which are configured in the bundle. If this option be choosen audit tool will always set its default tests. (default true)
  --validation bool          set false to disable the bundle validation checks. (default true). 
  --select-optional          label selector to select optional validators to run. Run this command with '--list-optional' to list available optional validators.
  --list-optional-validators List all optional validators available. When set, no report will be execute 
  `--optional-values`          string map with key and values which will be informed to the validators e.g`"k8s=1.21"` 
  --checks-only                     If set, disable the data report. It is useful for who would like to audit the index only runnning the checks and validations. 

>   --head-only                If set, audit only the operator bundles which are the head of the channel. (default all bundles of the index catalog image will be used)

Author: Added. See:

> To address this requirement a user will be able to use the flag `--filter` where the tool will only get the operator bundles where the package name is like `%name%`. 

Why not accepted regex?

See that some personas who would like to use it might not be developers then, I am trying here to make it simple.

>   --head-only                If set, audit only the operator bundles which are the head of the channel. (default all bundles of the index catalog image will be used)

Reviewer 3: > See that some personas who would like to use it might not be developers then, I am trying here to make it simple.

regex is still the right answer here.  Regex works very well even if you do not know regex because if you just pass a fixed string like `foo` it will still match `*foo*`. But it leaves the power of regex available for someone who knows it and needs its flexibility.

>   --head-only                If set, audit only the operator bundles which are the head of the channel. (default all bundles of the index catalog image will be used)

Author: I added the regex option. However, for a POC/alpha version that seems fine, we use simple SQL. Note that the regex might be so simple to be used with I am not sure if it is supportable for the stack used. Then, that requires a little more effort to be accomplished.

| Column | Description | 
| ------ | ----- | 
| Builder | `SDK` (if not found with the annotation described above)|
| Project Layout | value of `operators.operatorframework.io/project_layout` |
| Language | It will be `golang`, `ansible` or `helm`. Use the value of `operators.operatorframework.io/project_layout` to get this information. For example, if the annotation value is `ansible.sdk.operatorframework.io/vX` then, the language is ansible.|

##### By looking into the repository

> If the CSV and the index operator image has not the metric annotations then, we will need to check the info by verifying the files into the operator project repository.

Author: Yes, this data is the most important for example to PE team. See in the section `#### Report result columns` that a lot of info that we want to report requires to be obtained in the repo mainly when the bundle was not built with the latest sdk versions and has not the metrics annotation. See that we also have a POC linked here which shows that is totally achievable. https://github.com/jmccormick2001/indexdump

> If the CSV and the index operator image has not the metric annotations then, we will need to check the info by verifying the files into the operator project repository.

Author: For we get the aspects of the project we need to check the repo. However, if that is not possible for any reason then we just move forward. It is also described in this EP in the section `#### Handle failures scenarios`

> If the CSV and the index operator image has not the metric annotations then, we will need to check the info by verifying the files into the operator project repository.

Reviewer 3: I'm strongly averse to this functionality.  Especially if the primary consumer is the PE team(that makes it sound like an internal tool, not a user facing tool).  I also think it's going to be fragile (won't work with private git repos, behind proxies, with git repos using custom CAs, repos with unusual structures).  

I think it should be left out of the PoC entirely, and if it is ever added it should be disabled by default with the output report not evening mentioning these columns/fields unless it is explicitly enabled by the user.

> If the CSV and the index operator image has not the metric annotations then, we will need to check the info by verifying the files into the operator project repository.

Reviewer 4: when I was doing the indexdump, I found that using the git repo was almost impossible since you really have no idea what branch a project might be working off of...so I pretty much ended up not doing anything with the git repo at the end of that.

> If the CSV and the index operator image has not the metric annotations then, we will need to check the info by verifying the files into the operator project repository.

Author: Hi @bparees, @jmccormick2001, 

Without go to the repo we are unable to get the following info for all scenarios/or how much more is possible to:

- Builder
- SDK version
- Project Layout
- Language
- Golang Version 

See that if it faces one error we just give up and move forward. However, I still think that we can try to obtain that. 

> Especially if the primary consumer is the PE team(that makes it sound like an internal tool, not a user facing tool).

I know that this info is important for us PE. Also, shows important for any admin catalogue to take decisions as well.
Note that if the bundle was built with SDK > 1.0.0 then, we do not need to go to the repo. Otherwise, has not another way to find out that. 

> when I was doing the indexdump, I found that using the git repo was almost impossible since you really have no idea what branch a project might be working off of

my idea was to consider the default repo branch. all projects have a default one which usually is the master/main. 

 Are not this info part of our requirements? Are you sure that we should remove it completely?

> If the CSV and the index operator image has not the metric annotations then, we will need to check the info by verifying the files into the operator project repository.

Reviewer 3: > Also, shows important for any admin catalogue to take decisions as well.

What actions is a catalog admin going to take based on the SDK version an operator used, the golang version, the language, or any of this other information?  And why do they need to use this tool to collect that information instead of analyzing the bundles as they are adding them to the catalog in the first place?

This sort of discussion/debate is why i said early on that I did not want to invest energy in this effort(building this tool) right now when the team has more important concerns to focus on.

My judgement is that you should leave this information out of your PoC and if we think it's important in the future we can revisit how to add it safely and address these challenges, but i do not want to invest a bunch of mental cycles figuring out how to overcome these problems, or make assumptions like "it's the default branch" which will surely end up causing more confusion in the future for users.

> If the CSV and the index operator image has not the metric annotations then, we will need to check the info by verifying the files into the operator project repository.

Author: > What actions is a catalog admin going to take based on the SDK version an operator used, the golang version, the language, or any of this other information? And why do they need to use this tool to collect that information instead of analyzing the bundles as they are adding them to the catalog in the first place?

Allow them to be able to take decisions over how to move forward with the projects that they are responsible to distribute. For example, in the deprecation of Kubernetes api, the authors could check these aspects to know who they should contact and what kind of guidance they can/need to provide. 

Regarding the POC we do not need to implement everything at once. So, WDYT about we add here as OPTIONAL desires since it describes how to achieve that and I think we can keep this info at least. To address the current concerns for us at least I think we will need to add at some point.

> If the CSV and the index operator image has not the metric annotations then, we will need to check the info by verifying the files into the operator project repository.

Reviewer 3: >  For example, in the deprecation of Kubernetes api, 

None of the information you listed as being things you'd gather by inspecting the operator git repo included "use of k8s apis" (and in fact we do not have to inspect the git repo to determine this).  So the one example you have provided of why this is useful to a catalog admin, isn't actually fullfilled by what you are proposing doing here.

> Regarding the POC; we do not need to implement everything at once. So, WDYT about we update the EP and flag that as an OPTIONAL desire since it describes how to achieve that and I think we can keep this info at least. To address the current concerns for us I have the feeling that we will need to add at some point.

that's fine, but before it is implemented i expect us to revisit this conversation about whether it is worth doing given how fragile it will be and the limited utility of the information it collects.

> If the CSV and the index operator image has not the metric annotations then, we will need to check the info by verifying the files into the operator project repository.

Author: I marked it as optional. Thank you for your attention.

> If the CSV and the index operator image has not the metric annotations then, we will need to check the info by verifying the files into the operator project repository.

Author: ps. i updated the example before your comment ;-) I saw the depreciation api was not a good example.

| ------ | ----- | 
| Builder | `SDK`|
| Language | `ansible` |
| SDK Version | `v0.17.0` |

Now, see a [Dockerfile](https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-sdk-samples/blob/v0.17.0/helm/memcached-operator/build/Dockerfile) for a Helm operator project built with SDK version < 1.0. Then, note that the same fields will be obtained:

| Column | Description | 
| ------ | ----- | 
| Builder | `SDK`|
| Language | `helm` |
| SDK Version | `v0.17.0` |

**NOTE** The Dockerfile is a text file that can be parsable as any string. The audit command only requires to check by the line with `FROM quay.io/operator-framework/` and get the value after the `:` which in this example is `v0.17.0`. See [here](https://github.com/jmccormick2001/indexdump/blob/main/gethttp.go#L107) this implementation is done for the POC used as a base for this proposal.

### Auditing just the latest channel heads 

This option allows the user audit only the latest bundle versions (default channel heads) for each package. It can be enabled by setting `--head-only` boolean flag.

By using this flag, the audit command will filter the operator bundles in the first step to download and extract just this ones. 

> To know the operator bundles which are the latest head we will get only the entries which has values in the `operatorbundle` table for both `csv` and `bundle` column. 

Author: I added the info.
